Musings on Identity Management
==============================

*This post is an edited version of an email I sent to the Red Hat
Identity Management (IdM) team mailing list that outlines the main
take-aways from my first few months working on the FreeIPA identity
management solution.*

I'm over three months into my new gig on the identity management
team at Red Hat now, so I would like to share a few thoughts about
what I've learned about identity management.

I was excited to come into this role because of my innate interest
in security and cryptography.  I had little practical experience
with PKI and security protocols beyond basic X.509/TLS and OpenPGP,
so I have been relishing the opportunity to broaden my knowledge and
experience and solve problems in this domain.

What I did not understand, when I joined, was just how much an
effective IdM strategy and infrastructure can benefit businesses and
large communities in the form of improved security and reduced risk
(two sides of the same coin, one could argue) and of course, greater
efficiency.  The diversity of use cases and the versatility of our
software to address these use cases also amazed me.

This added perspective motivates me to seek opportunities to talk to
people and find out about their IdM needs and how existing offerings
(ours or others) are falling short, and work out what we as a team
can do to better meet and even anticipate their needs.  It has also
given me a foundation to explain to non-technical people what
FreeIPA and related projects are all about, and help them understand
how our solutions can help their business or community.

I say "community" above because I have begun to see that free
software communities represent valuable proving grounds for FreeIPA.
For example, a couple of weeks ago during PyCon Australia I was
chatting to Nick Coghlan and learned that the Python community is
currently struggling with a proliferation of identity silos -
developer accounts, PSF memberships and roles, the main website,
PyPI, and so on.  Yet noone has put their hand up to address this.
I didn't quite commit to writing a PEP to fix all that (yet) but we
agreed that this represents a great opportunity to employ FreeIPA to
benefit an important project and community - important for our team
and for Red Hat as well as for the software industry in general.
How many other communities to whom we have links or on whom we rely
could benefit from FreeIPA in a similar way?  And how much will our
solutions be improved, and new innovations discovered, by what we
might learn in working with these communities to improve their
identity management?

So, that's most of what I wanted to say, but I want to thank you all
for your assistance and encouragement during my first few months.
It has been quite a shift adapting to working with a global team,
but I am really enjoying working with you on Red Hat IdM and am
excited for our future.
