Wildcard certificates in FreeIPA
================================

The FreeIPA team sometimes gets asked about wildcard certificate
support.  A wildcard certificate is an X.509 certificate where the
DNS-ID has a wildcard in it (typically as the most specific domain
component, e.g. ``*.cloudapps.example.com``).  Most TLS libraries
match wildcard domains in the obvious way.

In this blog post we will discuss the state of wildcard certificates
in FreeIPA, but before proceeding it is fitting to point out that
`wildcard certificates are deprecated
<https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc6125#section-7.2>`__, and for good
reason.  While the compromise of any TLS private key is a serious
matter, the attacker can only impersonate the entities whose names
appear on the certificate (typically one or a handful of DNS
addresses).  But a wildcard certificate can impersonate *any* host
whose name happens to match the wildcard value.

In time, validation of wildcard domains will be disabled by default
and (hopefully) eventually removed from TLS libraries.  The
emergence of protocols like ACME that allow automated domain
validation and certificate issuance mean that there is no real need
for wildcard certificates anymore, but a lot of programs are yet to
implement ACME or similar; therefore there is still a perceived need
for wildcard certificates.  In my opinion some of this boils down to
lack of awareness of novel solutions like ACME, but there can also
be a lack of willingness to spend the time and money to implement
them, or a desire to avoid changing deployed systems, or taking a
"wait and see" approach when it comes to new, security-related
protocols or technologies.  So for the time being, some
organisations have good reasons to want wildcard certificates.

FreeIPA currently has no special support for wildcard certificates,
but with support for custom certificate profiles, we can create and
use a profile for issuing wildcard certificates.


Creating a wildcard certificate profile in FreeIPA
--------------------------------------------------

This procedure works on FreeIPA 4.2 (RHEL 7.2) and later.

First, ``kinit admin`` and export an existing service certificate
profile configuration to a file::

  ftweedal% ipa certprofile-show caIPAserviceCert --out wildcard.cfg
  ---------------------------------------------------
  Profile configuration stored in file 'wildcard.cfg'
  ---------------------------------------------------
    Profile ID: caIPAserviceCert
    Profile description: Standard profile for network services
    Store issued certificates: TRUE

Modify the profile; the minimal diff is::

  --- wildcard.cfg.bak
  +++ wildcard.cfg
  @@ -19 +19 @@
  -policyset.serverCertSet.1.default.params.name=CN=$request.req_subject_name.cn$, o=EXAMPLE.COM
  +policyset.serverCertSet.1.default.params.name=CN=*.$request.req_subject_name.cn$, o=EXAMPLE.COM
  @@ -108 +108 @@
  -profileId=caIPAserviceCert
  +profileId=wildcard

Now import the modified configuration as a new profile called
``wildcard``::

  ftweedal% ipa certprofile-import wildcard \
      --file wildcard.cfg \
      --desc 'Wildcard certificates' \
      --store 1
  ---------------------------
  Imported profile "wildcard"
  ---------------------------
    Profile ID: wildcard
    Profile description: Wildcard certificates
    Store issued certificates: TRUE


Next, set up a CA ACL to allow the ``wildcard`` profile to be used
with the ``cloudapps.example.com`` host::

  ftweedal% ipa caacl-add wildcard-hosts
  -----------------------------
  Added CA ACL "wildcard-hosts"
  -----------------------------
    ACL name: wildcard-hosts
    Enabled: TRUE

  ftweedal% ipa caacl-add-profile wildcard-hosts --certprofiles wildcard
    ACL name: wildcard-hosts
    Enabled: TRUE
    CAs: ipa
    Profiles: wildcard
  -------------------------
  Number of members added 1
  -------------------------

  ftweedal% ipa caacl-add-host wildcard-hosts --hosts cloudapps.example.com
    ACL name: wildcard-hosts
    Enabled: TRUE
    CAs: ipa
    Profiles: wildcard
    Hosts: cloudapps.example.com
  -------------------------
  Number of members added 1
  -------------------------

An additional step is required in FreeIPA 4.4 (RHEL 7.3) and later
(it does not apply to FreeIPA < 4.4)::

  ftweedal% ipa caacl-add-ca wildcard-hosts --cas ipa
    ACL name: wildcard-hosts
    Enabled: TRUE
    CAs: ipa
  -------------------------
  Number of members added 1
  -------------------------


Then create a CSR with subject ``CN=cloudapps.example.com`` (details
omitted), and issue the certificate::

  ftweedal% ipa cert-request my.csr \
      --principal host/cloudapps.example.com \
      --profile wildcard
    Issuing CA: ipa
    Certificate: MIIEJzCCAw+gAwIBAgIBCzANBgkqhkiG9w0BAQsFADBBMR8...
    Subject: CN=*.cloudapps.example.com,O=EXAMPLE.COM
    Issuer: CN=Certificate Authority,O=EXAMPLE.COM
    Not Before: Mon Feb 20 04:21:41 2017 UTC
    Not After: Thu Feb 21 04:21:41 2019 UTC
    Serial number: 11
    Serial number (hex): 0xB


Alternatively, you can use Certmonger to request the certificate::

  ftweedal% ipa-getcert request \
    -d /etc/httpd/alias -p /etc/httpd/alias/pwdfile.txt \
    -n wildcardCert \
    -T wildcard

This will request a certificate for the current host.  The ``-T``
option specifies the profile to use.


Discussion
----------

Observe that the subject common name (CN) in the CSR *does not
contain the wildcard*.  FreeIPA requires naming information in the
CSR to perfectly match the subject principal.  As mentioned in the
introduction, FreeIPA has no specific support for wildcard
certificates, so if a wildcard were included in the CSR, it would
not match the subject principal and the request would be rejected.

When constructing the certificate, Dogtag performs a variable
substitution into a subject name string.  That string contains the
literal wildcard and the period to its right, and the common name
(CN) from the CSR gets substituted in after that.  The relevant line
in the profile configuration is::

  policyset.serverCertSet.1.default.params.name=CN=*.$request.req_subject_name.cn$, o=EXAMPLE.COM

When it comes to wildcards in *Subject Alternative Name* DNS-IDs, it
might be possible to configure a Dogtag profile to add this in a
similar way to the above, but I do not recommend it, nor am I
motivated to work out a reliable way to do this, given that wildcard
certificates are deprecated.  (By the time TLS libraries eventually
remove support for treating the subject CN as a DNS-ID, I will have
little sympathy for organisations that still haven't moved away from
wildcard certs).

In conclusion: you shouldn't use wildcard certificates, and FreeIPA
has no special support for them, but if you really need to, you can
do it with a custom certificate profile.
